Gapped local alignment of motifs (GLAM2) is another algorithm proposed for discovering motifs that allows insertion or deletion of bases in a genome. A companion method called GLAM2SCAN searches sequence databases using such motifs [Frith et al. 2008]. A motif in GLAM2 has a certain number, W, of key positions. The idea is that the key positions hold amino acids or nucleotides that are important for the motif’s function. An instance of the motif is a string of residues (amino acids or nucleotides), where each residue either occupies one of the key positions or is inserted between key positions. GLAM2 searches for an alignment of substrings of the input sequences to a series of key positions. The number of key positions is optimized by the algorithm. In order to define the strongest motif, GLAM2 uses a formula to assign a numeric score to any given alignment. Then, the task is to find the alignment with the maximum score. GLAM2 utilizes a simple statistical model of a motif, with position-specific residue probabilities, position-specific deletion probabilities, and position-specific insertion probabilities. If each key position has characteristic probabilities, θi, containing the ith residue type, ϕ is the probability of each key position being deleted and ψx(1−ψ) is the probability that x residues are inserted between two key positions, This model can be regarded as a hidden Markov model, where θi are emission probabilities and ϕ and ψ are transition probabilities. Figure 5.4 shows motif alignment for multiple segments of sequences, where key positions are denoted by the * symbol.

To analyze the functionality of the algorithm, the authors applied GLAM2 to discover a model of a bipartite DNA-binding motif associated with the LMO2 gene. Figure 5.5 shows two motifs, a CAGGTG and a GATA, separated by a spacer of length 8 to 10 basepairs determined using the CAST-ing technique [Wadman et al. 1997]. CASTing is a procedure for identification of consensus sequences of DNA to which a protein, for example, a transcription factor, may bind. In Figure 5.6, when 31 random protein complexes are given as input, GLAM2 discovers the CAGGTG motif and extends the GATA motif on the right by three columns.
Figure 5.4A typical motif alignment from GLAM2. The stars indicate the key positions. The residues inserted between key positions are not considered aligned to each other; their column placement is arbitrary. The numbers on either side of the aligned segments indicate the coordinates of each segment within the sequence. The decimal numbers on the right are the marginal scores of each aligned segment. Reproduced from Frith et al. [2008].