Judea Pearl [2019] argues that understanding cause–effect connections is the hallmark of human cognition and is the necessary ingredient for achieving human-level intelligence. He outlined a three-level modeling hierarchy with the questions that can be answered at each level (Figure 1.1). These levels are association, intervention, and counterfactual. Association is purely based on statistical relationships. Machine learning algorithms are very advanced in finding common patterns and formulating these associations. For instance, a person who drinks more than one cup of coffee might experience disturbed sleep later that night; such associations can be observed from data alone. Predictive modeling is the main focus in this layer. The second level, intervention, ranks higher than association because it involves not just observing the association relationship but changing the behavior through intervention. For example, “What will happen if the person drinks tea instead of coffee?” Finally, the top level supports counterfactuals, and subsumes interventional and associational levels. Counterfactuals is a mode of reasoning that goes back to the philosophers David Hume and John Stuart Mill and has been given computer-friendly semantics in the past two decades through the efforts of Pearl [2000]. In this level, a typical question necessitates retrospective reasoning. For example, “Was it coffee that disturbed the person’s sleep?” The second and third levels are the bases of explanatory modeling.
Figure 1.1Causal hierarchy. Questions at each level can be answered only if information from the lower level is available [Pearl 2019].
In the modeling hierarchy, there is a direction, with the top level being the most powerful one and the association level being the most fundamental one. Correlation is not causality, as we cannot conclude cause–effect connections from association. However, without any association to begin with, we will not have the incentive to study causation. Hence, correlation is the mother of causality. Although designed controlled experiments or specialized causal inference methods for testing causality exists, in practice association-based models are commonly applied to observational data for causality testing.